Alexis Corbière: Hello! Hello Paris!
Céleste Van Isterdael: And hello Aubervillers! Hello Saint-Denis!
Alexis Corbière: La France Insoumise is so beautiful!
They're so many of you!
So many of you!
Since the beginning, our strength has been our number!
We are this great popular force!
This happy, powerful, conscious force,
and we'll keep being like this until the end!
Dear friends, we all gathered here today to live an exceptional event,
an unbelievable France Insoumise rally,
a world premiere!
This morning, all of you must have been as curious as I was.
You must have thought that after all,
the world entered the 21st century,
and the time has come for holograms! (reference to a musical)
Céleste Van Isterdael: This campaign and this movement are primarily made up of people who commit themselves,
you Insoumis and Insoumises.
This afternoon, we'll be working twice harder because we have a double Jean-Luc,
and because the two of us will present this rally.
You probably already saw him and heard him on TV, on the radio,
he is one of the spokespersons of Jean-Luc,
and he might be laid off if Jean-Luc keeps organizing holographic rallies.
It's a possibility.
He'll be presenting this rally with me today, his name is Alexis Corbière.
AC: She is not a well-paid parliamentary assistant who has difficulties proving she actually works (reference to the Fillon affair).
She is not a writer for a magazine who never met the chief editor.
She is a teacher—a useful job!
Her name is wonderful, and it perfectly suits the performance that we are about to live.
Her name is Céleste Van Isterdael,
and I'll say 'tu' Céleste.
CVI: Stop...
Stop joking, they'll think we are Céleste and Babeard.
Jean-Luc is getting prepared at a distance of exactly
454 km,
and yet in about 20 minutes,
he'll be both here and there.
It is a world premiere.
Jean-Luc will be live with us thanks to an hologram.
We've been campaigning for a year now,
and all France is waking up and turning Insoumise (rebel/unsubdued).
You are here today,
and we're creating a real dynamic with a France Insoumise that refuses the presidential monarchy
and that advocates the establishment of a 6th Republic.
We are...
We are 77 days from the first round of the presidential election,
and when we see the heavy turnout here and in Lyon
—some people are standing in line on a distance of several hundred meters here and in Lyon—
we perfectly know that the only reliable poll is you, your enthusiasm, your number and your mobilization.
AC: Yes!
We are currently 230,000 Insoumis,
2,400 support groups across the country,
we are the leading political movement in France,
I think we can say this, Céleste.
CVI: These support groups and these political activists make La France Insoumise.
La France Insoumise is not a party but a movement,
and it has a programme, "L'Avenir en commun" (Common Future).
AC: Indeed, it's not a party but a movement that was launched almost a year ago.
Remember, our anniversary will be next February 10th,
Jean-Luc Mélenchon announced he was running for president on February 10th 2016,
and immediately thousands of contributions poured in on the website jlm2017.fr.
These thousands of contributions helped us write the program "L'Avenir en commun".
All this energy enabled us to make this movement live.
We can only rely on ourselves,
bankers are not our friends,
which is why we need everyone who can to donate until the month of April.
CVI: Among other things, your financial contributions enable us to fund Jean-Luc's famous Youtube channel.
Each week, he reviews major events, and we are now 197,000 subscribers to his Youtube channel,
and we are close to reach the number of 200,000 subscribers!
We are 950,000 followers on Twitter, 633,000 on Facebook,
and we are now going to watch the highlights of his Weekly Review on the screens.
Hello my friends, this is the first episode of a series of videos.
[The Weekly Review]
Hello, it's me again!
Hello people!
Hello!
So now I'm going to talk to you about Trump.
You heard that there was a referendum in Italy.
The pardon case of Jacqueline Sauvage.
An increase of poverty in the country.
Trump's election in the USA.
Video games are entering the 3D dimension.
CETA is the treaty with the USA.
Oceans! My dealing with oceans is not a surprise.
I'm doing this with Lise who is filming right now, while Mathias is just watching doing nothing.
It's one of the four most offered books for Christmas,
and I'd like to know why it was not THE most offered book!
I know why: you chickened out!
Can't stenchon the Melenchon!
What do you rely on?
The Socialist Party's primary election? Is that it?
Their thing is not a primary, it's depressing!
Yes, we canchon!
Water with good vibes! Hmm, perfect!
It's the only mug that purifies water.
As a result, I got a present from Youtube.
Let me show you.
It's Youtube Play Button for channels that reached 100,000 subscribers.
You just saw Jean-Luc on the screens,
but you'll see him as large as life on March 18th for the restorming of the Bastille.
He'll be with us, with you, and with tens of thousand of activists from all over France.
We want to thank each and everyone of you activists from Lyon, from Ile-de-France (district around Paris),
without whom this rally would not have been possible.
You are pushing back the frontiers of activism more and more everyday,
from Lebanon to Chile, from Japan to Aubervilliers,
and our rally will deal with the frontiers of humanity.
AC: Yes.
Frontiers have always been an intellectual matter.
The frontiers we are going to deal with today do not enclose us, it's precisely the opposite.
The frontiers of humanity are today's limits of the world we know,
for there is an unknown world that is waiting to be discovered thanks to the forces of the human mind.
These three great frontiers that we want to push back are the sea, space and the virtual and digital world.
CVI: And we're going to begin with the sea, because you know that our country is one of the leading maritime powers.
AC: You know that oceans covers 70 % of the Earth's surface.
This is why we call it the Blue Planet,
and maybe we should have called it the Sea Planet.
It is a source of tremendous possibilities.
CVI: Oceans are the first pillar of these new fontiers.
It amazes us like the stars that guide sailors.
Stars that...
Ac: I think that someone from Lyon is going to contact us in a few seconds.
Both: We are about to witness a world premiere.
AC: Apparently, there's a lot of people in Lyon too.
We just need...
We just need to wait a few seconds.
We'll say it again, but as you saw, there's a huge turnout.
A lot of people are still waiting outside here and in Lyon,
and in a few seconds, we'll be in contact with Charlotte Girard and Guillaume Taddu
who are presenting the Lyon rally.
We just need to wait a few seconds...
Someone is talking in my ear, you know?
As you understood, the three great frontiers of humanity are the sea, the Earth, and the virtual and digital world.
CVI: And space!
AC: And space!
CVI: Stars!
AC: So...?
AC: Let's carry on then!
CVI: So oceans are the first pillar!
AC: Exactly!
CVI: The first pillar...
that amazes us like stars, and stars are a point of reference for sailors but they're also new frontiers
that we need to push back.
AC: As you see, we're trying to push back these new frontiers of humanity.
And there we are!
Guillaume Taddu: Thank you! Louder please! We're joining Alexis Corbière and Céleste live from Paris
Alexis Corbière is Jean-Luc Mélenchon's spokesman, and Céleste is an activist of La France Insoumise
Hello to you both, how is it going in Paris?
CVI: It's going great here! There's 6,000 of us and both rooms are full!
Some people are standing in line outside.
The atmosphere is great, and I suggest that we applaud until Lyon hears us.
Let us hear you!
Everyone: Resistance! Resistance! Resistance!
Charlotte Girard: Well, I think that people from Lyon are here too!
GT: The atmosphere is great between Lyon and Paris,
and I have a figure to communicate.
As you heard, there are 6,000 people in Paris, and there's 12,000 of us here in Lyon!
This makes a total of 18,000 people in Lyon and Paris for this rally today!
There's 18,000 of us for this great rally of February 5th!
So Alexis and Céleste, can you quickly describe the place to us?
Jean-Luc Mélenchon's hologram is going to appear in a few seconds, but how is it going to take place?
CVI: We have a very large stage with a veil on the center of which the hologram is going to be projected.
This is high technology, because the future starts today..
The room is completely full in front of me.
All the seats are taken, I can't see the terraces in the back.
Some people are standing, people are everywhere.
A lot of activists came here today.
Charlotte Girard: There's lots of people here too.
Our Mélenchon is going to stand here, in the center of this arch when the floodlights are turned on,
and as soon as they are, he'll be in Paris in a snap!
GT: Both rooms are incredible!
I assure you that the view is amazing, there are so many of you, I love this view,
and I'd like to share it with you, let's take a picture here in Lyon and Paris!
We'll post it on Twitter with the #JLMhologramme hashtag.
Let's share this view with everyone,
especially with those who would not believe it.
We'll show them on the social media.
Let's take a video from Lyon and from Paris!
Make some noise so that we hear you!
And there we are! I'm posting it right now on Twitter with the #JLMHologramme hashtag.
#JLMHologramme is the hashtag we'll be using this afternoon in Lyon and Paris.
CG: It's about to begin!
GT: Yes it is! It begins!
Make some noise! This is a world premiere!
There he is, as promised. We do keep our promises!
It's a brilliant feat of engeneering that illustrates the state of mind of our bold and inventive campaign.
Here comes our candidate, the candidate of La France Insoumise!
Please make some noise to welcome Jean-Luc Mélenchon!
Jean-Luc Mélenchon: It looks good!
Hi Eliott!
You all right girls? You managed to survive!
Audience: Resistance! Resistance! Resistance!
CG: Wow wow wow!
JLM: Thank you!
So...
Where am I?
Can you hear me?
Audience: Yes!
JLM: It's unbelievable!
So where am I?
Audience: You're in Lyon!
Am I in Lyon?
Audience: Yes!
JLM: And now, I'm in Paris!
You are doing an extraordinary show of force.
You are showing that you are strong and patient.
This force doesn't come from nowhere.
It comes from an accumulated human and political experience
that we wanted to call into play again for the fight a year ago,
with a wealth of accumulated experience during so many fights and after so many treasons!
We have wanted to build a force,
and we are about to succeed.
A force that learns, that knows why it fights.
A force that is not committed to a man, but to a cause, to an idea that has lived throughout centuries.
I will die one day, but the ideas that I represent will not, not as long as there's a breath of freedom,
that is, not as long as there is a human being to look over the horizon.
This force built itself on the basis of the 230,000 people who now support my candidacy
and the program "L'Avenir en commun" (Common Future).
700 volunteers joined their forces to professionals between Lyon and Paris to make these rallies possible.
Yes, this rally is not like other rallies.
It is not like other rallies because of the form it takes.
There is this hologram.
I heard that some grumps said it looked like showbusiness too much.
But an emancipatory and exploring political message has to rely on the techniques of our time,
techniques that must make us dream and smile.
And let me reassure you, no one is deceived, people in Paris know I'm not there.
My only clone is me, but I know people who are the clones of other people
This rally stands out from other rallies because of a context, a local context more particularly.
This weekend, the three political families that share and contend for the support of the French people were in Lyon.
We've been trying to gain this support month after month, week after week, with precise arguments.
Who are these families?
First, there's Mrs. Le Pen, with...
...with her ethnic communitarianism that is basted with a heavy touch of family clanship.
You know this, it's the traditional far-right.
Traditionally bad!
And then there's Mr. Macron, who brilliantly emboddies...
What's going to happen if I list them all?
Mr. Fillon?
No, he's not in Lyon this weekend!
I was talking about Mr. Macron because he too emboddies a kind of thought.
It is the kind of thought that has made us suffer so cruelly for the last thirty years.
It is liberalism, a world where it is every man for himself, where everybody competes with everybody else,
where social indifference rules, with a few friendly ecological ideas of no consequence now and then,
because after all, as you know, what matters above all to these people is competitiveness, flexibility and austerity,
and to produce before sharing out,
as if we had not spent our life producing while we did not receive much!
It's your call!
You're about to make a choice in a crucial moment.
We already lost ten years!
The 21st century has already begun, and we are still using outdated intellectual mechanisms.
Our political elites are all cast in the same obsolete mold!
We need to kick them out as quickly and quietly as possible!
And this process is already well under way!
It's already under way during this presidential campaign.
The candidates all have things to hide,
it looks like they're playing hide and seek!
But it's above all a wave that I called a "kick-outist wave", in reference to my Tunisian friends.
"Kick-outism" consists in kicking them out!
But we must give some content to this "kick-outist" wave.
We must get the French people involved, because if the people chooses to give us the possibility to decide,
then we'll have to take our responsibility,
and not from above, i.e. from the action of a man and the handful of people around him,
but from the involvement of millions of people who'll carry the civic revolution we need on their workplace and everywhere they'll go.
Dont' believe for one moment...
You who are used to obey the law, who are real democrats and who accept sometimes to lose an election
They never accept to lose, financial powers will never accept to lose,
and you who are in this room, outside and in Paris, you are my bulwark!
Why?
Not because they would rally to my white plume, but because all of you will know what you'll have to do,
because you'll know what function to occupy and because you'll have understood the program.
This is why we must always talk about ideas!
It took us eight months to make this program.
There were thousands of contributions, we heard specialists, and we held a convention that approved it.
The programme is made up of 357 propositions that are gathered in this book.
Even now, everyone can read it, criticize it and improve it.
Forty booklets develop the program in detail for each topic, because a book like this cannot go to the bottom of things.
Why am I saying this?
It is because our movement must rely on awareness and education,
and not on sudden enthusiasms and magic mushrooms that grow in the political jungle of media bubbles!
This is the price of efficiency!
You have 78 days left to commit yourselves before the presidential election,
taking into account the reality of the presidential monarchy, that fell into hands... hmmm...
hmm... that lacked confidence.
For ten years, they have failed on almost every subject.
Remember that the next five years will be decisive for the future of our country,
but also for the rest of the world.
In the next five years, a new European treaty will be presented.
In the next five years, the TAFTA treaty with the USA and the CETA treaty with Canada will be presented,
according to which any independent economic policy whatsoever becomes impossible!
In these conditions, you must carefully choose whether you want to carry on or to break from this,
and "L'Avenir en commun" emboddies this break with old habits.
It is unbelievable that only 78 days from the election, we still have to run after some people
who try to seek refuge after they were kicked out and who leave us with no basis for discussion.
Where are their programs?
That's enough!
Give them to us! Tell us what you intend to do!
Just uttering a few well-intentioned sentences now and then is not enough!
Tell us what articulates all these programs we hear about—I mean these measures—that you propose!
They do not form a coherent whole.
Tell me how you could do this or that,
give this or that, launch such and such plan.
As long as you obey the European budgetary treaties,
no progressive policy is possible!
We must withdraw from European treaties!
It is a prerequisite for change.
Of course, we need to do that in conditions that correspond to our homeland's vocation,
we can't do that on our own, fleeing on the sly.
We must explain, negotiate and make other countries do the same.
But if the protests of the French people are not heard,
this people whose industry was devastated and who was impoverished like we can see it today,
then we must either change the EU or leave it!
Everyone has to understand that there is no other way than changing!
To those who would not be satisfied by the program, let me tell you that
next February 19th, we will spend 6 hours explaining the program's budget
because it is a very ambitious program and because it is a complete change.
You know the premises. First, we need to change the system of the presidential monarchy
—I'll come back to this in a moment.
Secondly, we need to share the wealth in such a way that the imbalance that makes
that there are more billionaires and millionaires in this country than ever before while there are 9 million poor,
while 148,000 people no longer have an address, while 2 million people are waiting for housing.
All these things ruin the life of people for no reason whereas the country is so rich!
We will never be able to produce as we used to,
except if we turn completely crazy and if we don't care about the future of the planet.
Ecological planning, that scared so many people who looked at me with suspicion when they heard the word 'planning',
because it made them think of USSR, although they forget that General De Gaulle did make plans,
to say nothing of Americans and of all the big companies in the world who have always planned their activities.
We won't be able to plan the ecological transition if we do not make plans, to say so is a lie!
We need to make plans, and consequently anticipate,
and consequently regain control over the long term, which is a public property.
Finally, to avoid quoting all the program, we are acting for peace.
We don't want a war in Europe.
We dont' want to go to war with Russia
We're asking you to leave us in peace when we say so
and to stop calling us Mr Putin's henchmen,
because he's not ruling our country and because we have nothing to do with him in this matter.
Do I always have to remember...
that Russians are our partners, that they contributed to free us,
and that their regime is their business,
just as our regime is our business.
In any case, accepting the insane idea of a European defence is out of the question.
They came up with this idea to substitute it to the fading dream of Europe.
There they go again with their so-called European defense project, but against whom should we defend ourselves ?
The Europe of defense is the Europe of war,
but we are in favor of the Europe of peace!
France should in no way be a war tank for any army whatsoever!
When we organized this rally and asked you to take part, I had the idea of closing a cycle.
This is the 16th speech I give since September,
and speech after speech,
after a long team work, we highlight such and such point that seems important and that makes people think,
in order to spur people's appetite to find out more about the program by reading it.
This is an educational campaign,
not an hallucinogenic one.
And  now...
I thought—before taking a five days off—that I would use this rally to look high above the horizon.
I just told you about the outline of the program,
but you all know the challenges that we'll have to meet.
The challenges of peace and climate change, which is already under way
and already caused a flow of 20 million refugees
on the 60 million refugees that are currently roaming about the world in abominable conditions.
We must also meet the challenge of sharing the tremendous wealth
that is not only morally scandalous for us who belong to the side of human emancipation,
but that hinders any attempt at a coordinated development of the planet that swarms with human beings,
because you know that there were hardly 2 billion human beings on the planet in 1950,
whereas we are now 7 billion,
and we'll soon be 11 billion human beings.
We are exerting huge demographic pressure as a battle for raw materials is taking shape and raging everywhere,
but we are having discussions that are of secondary importance
compared to the great challenges that will completely transform the fate of the upcoming century.
Yes, completely!
As we think about these challenges, we must take into account that the issues we have known until now
will apply to new fronts and to new frontiers.
The human civilization is threatened, but it has the means to overcome the crisis it is currently going through
because of climate change and other factors that disrupt the human ecosystem.
These disruptions are nothing but the result of greed and the will to appropriate everything, everywhere,
you and I know this.
Well look how this battle for ownership and selfishness moved to new frontiers.
History unfolds quickly.
The human civilization is undergoing a phenomenon that we call the acceleration of history,
we are all more or less aware of it.
Please try to remember the changes that occurred in your life,
changes that you could have never imagined as a child.
My grandmother used to go to the local bal in Staoueli by horse-drawn cart.
She was brought back France by plane.
She could read in the newspapers that Yuri Gagarin was the first man to cross the space frontier.
As for me, I came to COP1 by plane—this was not very ecological I know.
I travelled in President Mitterand's Concorde aircraft, and it took us 3 hours to get from Paris to Rio.
I was in Baikonur to see Jean-Loup Chrétien—the first French astronaut—taking off for space.
History is accelerating.
I said that the human civilization would enter oceans in one of my books, and it did!
I said that we human beings gather on the edge of the frontier, and we cross it, that's the way it has always happened,
and that's the way it happens with the sea, and consequently, a battle begins,
and the same happens with space.
These are not irrelevant issues!
You will have to face these issues very soon—you are even facing them right now,
because you may have come here using a GPS,
which shows that you are already connected to space and to the satellites that revolve around the Earth.
But something even more incredible happened.
We usually discovered continents and got a foothold on them—I won't remind you how we did this—but we did,
and now, a continent is getting a foothold on us.
It reshapes our tastes, our moods and our desires.
This continent is the digital continent.
These are the new frontiers.
The stakes are high.
These frontiers have to do with our freedom.
They have to do with the possibility of sharing all the joys we can share and all the wealth we can produce.
Yes, these new frontiers of humanity do concern the presidential election.
France is never as great as when it considers itself a part of universal humanity.
We are not here to make chauvinistic statements,
we are here to think ourselves with our level of culture, education and preparation,
with the tremendous wealth that was accumulated by our elders.
We are here to meet our responsibilities towards universal humanity,
not only as French, but also as human beings.
Yes!
I am saying all this because we are going to do it!
If we are entrusted with the task of governing the country,
we will do this with enthusiasm,
and we'll stop feeling ashamed
because of all these people who spend their time making everyone feel guilty
by saying that workers don't work, that France doesn't make any progress, that the French are ignorant.
and that our school system is worth nothing.
This rally should therefore be a hymn of love to the history of France and to who we are:
France, the country that invented the Declaration of Human Rights,
France, the eldest daughter of social security and secular school.
But we can only cross these frontiers...
Look at them! Frontiers usually divide, but they can also unite us.
How shall we do that?
Nothing will be possible in this century if every human being doesn't reach the highest level of education.
Education consists in sharing knowledge,
and knowledge is the only thing that grows as we share it.
Humanity develops through what we call cumulative culture,
which makes humanity stand out from other animal species, including social animals.
We share knowledge, and we are able to pass it down from generation to generation.
This is even easier now that we overcame the limits of time,
because in the past, knowledge was only stored in the heads of wise men,
and one day, Mr Gutenberg helped us overcoming the limits of time thanks to writing.
Let's give it some thought.
We can't do anything without knowledge,
and knowledge is not only the things we learn at school or at the university.
Knowledge is a way of being fully human, and to develop all our aspects of human beings.
Knowledge is nothing if it is not preceded by a culture that shapes our heart and our mind,
that unleashes our imagination and that constantly develops our appetite for knowledge.
If it is not shared, without culture and above all without creators, knowledge is worth nothing!
In the procession of human history, the poets and the musicians are walking before us,
and they are accompanied by highly skilled workers and all those who keep the country going day in, day out.
So, Mrs Le Pen...
Who gave you such an idea?
How could you believe that this could be a good idea?
How could you believe that preventing foreigners' children from going to school could be a good idea?
Who can believe that a society gets better when people become more ignorant?
Only an ignorant can believe that!
I clearly see...
Another of her absurd ideas proves it.
She said that pupils should devote 50 % of their school time to learning the French language.
50 % of their school time?
So what language do they speak during the remaining
50 %?
Doesn't she know that we learn a language through practice?
Pupils learn the French language during their whole school time, by studying mathematics, history and geography!
Do you want these people to govern your country?
Come on!
We will not only teach all the pupils in our schools to read, write, count, love, write poems and play music,
because it will make us better people,
but besides, we will redesign the school catchment area to avoid rich and poor ghettos,
thanks to the republican school!
We will guarantee a free access to education in all its aspects,
and we will get rid of this new tax on people that is disguised as a measure on school timetables,
a tax for taking care of their children, whereas they should be in school!
That's not all!
In addition to that, every child from 3 to 18 will attend school,
because we need them to learn seriously and thoroughly.
Earlier children are enrolled in school, earlier they get socialized.
That doesn't mean that we have to ram socialism down their throats,
it means that we include them in the human community.
What children need in the first place is human interaction, to learn all the codes and understand what makes this human community
otherwise they become violent, and therefore they need human presence, not to be put in front of television.
And because I take these questions very seriously...
—I can tell because I have known them closely—
When they study, students must have time and resources to do so. They should not have to work at the same time.
The 50% of young people who work and study at the same time are wearing themselves out!
That is not good! That is not good!
Only the rich think that other people's hard work is a good thing!
So we have to put in place an independent student allowance. And there will be one.
In addition to that... In addition to that...
As far as vocational education is concerned, where the average age is often a bit higher than in other studies,
well, I want to put an end to the fact that 100 % of people of an age group , or 100% of a promotion
be forced to work every evening and every weekend while they study.
That is why all the students from 16 years old who are in vocational education will be entitled to this student allowance.
Ah Ah! Here is something which is going to change the distribution of social roles in this country!
My friends, we need 60.000 more professors and teachers of all sorts, to compensate those we lost under Sarkozy,
and those who have not been replaced by François Hollande.
And you know, I will not content myself with saying that.
You are applauding but on February 19th, you will come and ask how much it costs, because everybody is going to ask about the cost.
What is the cost of stupidity? What is the cost of death?
What are those unilateral accountancies?
We need professors.
Hiring people to educate children enriches the country, it does not impoverish it.
Knowledge is an Investment, not an expense!
There's something else I'll to tell you!
When I was a young man— yes it happened once...
When we did not have a lot of money but were talented for school and wanted to make a career
well we would go to "Ecole Normale" (teacher's training college).
We would go there after 16 and we would get a salary,
so that both teachers and pupils in those colleges were coming from the same social background.
But when we are required—I understand this although I don't always agree with it—
to have a master's degree level to be able to become a professor,
well I know that families have to be able to dedicate an important part of their income
to help their child until graduation to become a professor.
What I suggest is that we use a pre-recruitment system again.
We will pre-recruit people of 16 or 17, we will give them a salary,
and they will owe 10 years of service to the country's schools to which they will be assigned to go and teach.
Thus, they will have the same color and they will look like the whole French people.
I told you about how to build knowledge.
I fume at the way thugs talk about research,
whereas we have accumulated so much knowledge.
Have you heard them giggling: "Ah Ah you've searched enough, now it is time to find".
They are thugs!
The mind won't let itself be indoctrinated.
The first thing we must say is that if we respect research and practical sciences,
then we have a very long-term interest in having a free French basic research,
in which researchers are not asked every 5 minutes when the patent they work on can be marketed!
You need freedom of thought rather than freedom of trade!
Yes, freedom of thought,
because there are important challenges ahead of us that we must solve.
If we want to phase out nuclear power—and we want to!—
not to blame those who developped it, but because it's dangerous!
We can do this, and those who built these nuclear power plants can help us stop them.
My friends, it will take 20 to 25 years to dismantle nuclear power plants,
and in the meantime will come other means of producing energy thanks to ecological planning.
But what is going to happen to nuclear wastes?
We don't even know what to do with them!
Ten years later, we are still working on the very first nuclear power plant we began to dismantle.
Therefore, we need basic nuclear research to understand the radiation mechanism and stop it,
otherwise, we will have this rubbish on our hands for the next 10,000 years!
We need free basic research.
We need educated minds that look for solutions, that make research, and that sometimes make unexpected discoveries.
We need to stop considering that research is linked to private companies
And enough with this research tax credit!
Do you know about it?
No you don't know? Well let me inform you that there is one!
Who benefitted from the money that we gave away like that? I had a look at the list and what did I see? Banks!
Do these people still need to learn anything about the art of robbing other people? It's a good question!
And yet they were given money.
This is unacceptable!
These funds have to be dedicated to research. These funds have to be dedicated to our most sacred tasks.
I don't want to close this part without telling you about this.
We are this great country, with so many poets, writers, scientists and Fields medals!
We won more Fields medals than any country.
Our CNRS is the best research center in the world.
So tell me, where does this indifference come from,
that makes us let 2.5 million people to suffer from illiteracy in our country?
We will start a campaign—a campaign like those that were carried in third world countries if we have to,
and with their help, because they're better at it—
to get all those who can't read out of illiteracy by the end of the upcoming presidential term!
Being illiterate doesn't mean you are stupid.
It doesn't mean you are ignorant.
It doesn't mean you don't have knowledge.
It just means that you can't read and write fluently.
Therefore, there are considerable treasures of imagination and intelligence
that are taken from the human collectivity, just for that reason!
We must make up for this, and make it one of our priorities
—no matter the skin color, no matter the religion, no matter the origins of those who are in that situation!
Earlier, I said: "Ha, ha!"...
"Ha, ha!"—They turned off the stopwatch, so this rally can last for hours
Earlier, I told you that knowledge was nothing without culture.
Yes!
There are other people who talk about culture.
It makes me laugh, because the media and political world steeps in a goldfish atmosphere,
Nobody ever remembers anything,
nor compares anything with something else.
However, when it is about going into raptures or being delighted, people are very much enclined to do so.
So I heard Mr Macron talking about culture.
To be honest, when technocrats and bankers take an interest in culture, I usually am suspicious.
What are they going to invent to poison people's life and rob them?
Well he suggested something that I find remarkable for a liberal who doesn't believe in state power as we do.
He suggested that people celebrating their 18th birthday—this is not a vote-catching proposition of course!—
would be awarded a 500 euros check by the state to be spent in cultural products and activities.
I don't know how many people worked on this idea.
But wait! They missed a part of the reasoning—it's my turn to have a laugh.
They say: "We have to produce before sharing out!",
as if we had never produced anything in this country and were just about to do it
because these "important" people ordered us to do so.
It's my turn to have a laugh and to say that before giving out checks to be spent in cultural activities,
we have to produce them to begin with!
And you don't produce culture like you make bolts. Or vaults—no, not vaults, it was for the rhyme.
Culture is like a delicate flower, it grows in people's minds,
and it won't grow if people are forced to appreciate it.
And for something to grow, it has to be fed a lot to begin with.
You need to listen to music, to go to the theater, to read books, to look at statues,
Etc, etc, etc.
Before being spread—which is very important—culture must be produced!
And now, I'm going to reveal something else that is very important  to these people .
Creation does not come out of the blue, there has to be people who create,
but to do that, they need to be able to live with dignity.
Therefore, the first task of a cultural policy is to make sure that creators are able to live with dignity
We must stop intimidating creators who have the insecure status of "intermittent du spectacle"
by constantly telling them they could lose their status
On the contrary, we must draw our inspiration from this status to imagine what the status of independent creator could be
in other fields of artistic creation like writing, comics writing or whatnot...
That is why—since all this costs money,
and you know that we have to answer when it gets to the cost of things...
Some don't!
Because Mr Macron doesn't seem to be worried about the fact that the state give 500 euros to people on their 18th birthday!
I mean, if the culture industry was only made of big production companies, the money would circulate in closed circuit.
But since we advocate a different organization, we see things differently, obviously.
By the way, I heard he came up with another idea—this guy really has extraordinary obsessions!
He said: "People should read!"
Good!
"Therefore, libraries should be open on Saturdays and Sundays!"
On Saturdays? But it's already the case!
So all he wants is people to work on Sundays, because there are librarians who work in libraries,
and without librarians, libraries wouldn't exist!
He didn't think about it!
When these guys have ideas, they can't be stopped!
This one ruined the life of thousands of people by participating in the writing of the El Khomri Labor law.
He ruined the life of thousands of people with his Uber-like inventions!
But now he just added a new professional category who are going to join our cause: librarians!
Here is what we should do.
Holland's government is the only government of the past ten years that made cuts in the culture budget.
We should stop dithering and debating... All this is over!
We must stay a course and go back to the idea of dedicating 1 % of the country's wealth to culture,
to develop it, to spread it, to instil it in people.
I propose that we create five to six thousand classes focusing on cultural and artistic purposes,
which will allow to get the external cultural partners involved and raise the cultural level of our youths.
Listen people!
A few days ago, I went to the International Comics Festival in Angoulême.
I love cartoons, I guess I'm not the only one here.
So we talked a lot, and someone told me that 30% of comics writers lived below the poverty line.
Don't believe that making comics is as easy as abc.
It's a long process.
And you seem to like it, because French people read comics a lot.
We need creators to be able to work, you know that.
Those who write comics blow our minds and feed our imagination—you often buy the comics you skimmed!
And above all, they produce the raw material that is going to be developped, processed, worked
by those who make video games—I will come to this point in a moment.
They are working on a brand new continent for education and life as we see them for the 21st century.
In short, these people are essential!
So how are we going to do this?
They had an idea that I adopted and suggested  to my friends who work in the cultural committee
who wrote our booklet about culture.
You can read for further information.
And here is the idea.
In order to fund these cooperatives of independent creators,
or such and such type of association that would suit these creators,
because we need to trust them to come up with new ideas in this domain.
Creators are often independent people—not always— but they are rather used to work on their own.
But not all of them!
As a consequence, we must respect this. We can't be authoritarian and tell them to do this or that.
They have to develop themselves independently, but the resource we advocate is as follows.
I'm presenting it for the first time this afternoon.
When a work of art has been distributed for a certain number of years,
it enters into the public domain, which means that the heirs of the author can no longer get royalties.
Because often, the author is dead. First problem!
You must be waiting for the rest, right?
After a certain period, this work enters into the public domain.
Here is my proposition.
It will never enter any public domain that is not a common domain. Let me explain.
On these works that no longer entitle heirs to get royalties according to the present intellectual property law,
after this time limit—40, 50, and even 70 years, as is suggested by the EU,
that absolutely wants publishers to get as many royalties as they can,
well we would grant the same rights as before—a bit less maybe—
and these royalties would feed a fund that would contribute to creators' social situation.
This is what we call socializing the public domain of creation.
Did everyone understand?
How much does it cost?
This would enable thousands of creators to live, and more particularly to fund their retirement pensions.
This is very important. We all aspire to security, which led my friends and I to conceive a full social security
that would cover 100 % of healthcare reimbursements,
and that would enable people who paid contributions for 40 years to retire at the age of 60.
Why should the members of the human elite who entertain us and  feed our minds should live in misery
just because their creations are not enough to provide for their basic needs?
We can be more ambitious if we want to!
Do you know who came up with this idea?
There's a copyright!
No, it's not Karl Marx!
It's Victor Hugo, my friends. The great Victor Hugo!
His opponents told him: "What are you doing Mr Hugo?
You are attacking private property!"
He answered: "Whose property? As long as an author is alive, he get royalties!"
-"But what if he's dead?"
-Victor Hugo: "Well that's the point!"
Victor Hugo was more ambitious than the measure I just told you about.
But I give my opponents leeway, I'm already known for wanting to expropriate everything!
Here is the leeway.
We'll take the royalties on the works when the author has passed away,
because why would someone be legitimate for inheriting a work of art?
OK, let's say that the widow or widower could, but why would someone be legitimate for inheriting a work of art?
To Vicor Hugo, there is no legitimate reason for this.
Let me quote him.
"He who inherits blood inherits blood".
He was refering to writers. "The writer as a writer has only one heir, the heir of the spirit,
the human spirit, that is, the public domain. That is the absolute truth!"
When I was in Angoulême, someone suggested this idea that we'll advocate from now on.
We will be the first generation to have a global system that enables every creator to live with dignity,
and consequently to live for the sole purpose of doing what they do,
something we need badly, their cultural productions.
We'll be the ones who do it, within the framework of our programme, "L'Avenir en commun" (Common Future).
All right!
I was in Angoulême, and woosh, I went to the public school of video games—because there is one!
This leads me to the digital world.
I'd better not mix up the papers.
Yes, video games are a new world.
I really want to tell you about it.
It is a total experience.
The worldwide budget of the video games industry today is more important than that of the cinema industry!
It enables users to live a total experience.
It enabled me to climb a frozen mountain.
I tried not to get too close from the edge because I have a fear of heights.
And then someone told me: "You see, this is a therapeutic instrument".
It enables users to learn faster because it is a total experience,
and French developers are among the best in the world,
which is why—considering how extraordinary this tool is for learning and developping culture—it is a challenge for the 21st century!
This sector is still in its infancy in France, but it should become a state-of-the-art industry of our homeland.
Thousands of people must get to work, and they already are,
and if you see them working—I the former teacher feel concerned!
I saw a young woman with a bachelor's degree in English who was working with a young digital engineer,
and the two of them were doing something unusual,
they had an open way of working, one knew what the other was doing, whereas their work was purely intellectual,
as if they were on a building site, where a plumber, knowing what the plasterer and the painter are doing,
adapts his work accordingly and makes his own demands.
This extraordinary collaboration filled me with enthusiasm,
and it showed how inventive these video games will be when they come out,
because these ARE video games—don't laugh!
Humanity as a whole started with your own children,
as for us, we learned social roles and rituals through games when we were kids, and animals do the same.
When someone invented such a wonderful technique, it has to be shared.
Playing is not a waste of time.
Playing may even be an opportunity for becoming better people. OK, I said it!
This leads me to the digital world.
This is also a continent.
You must get interested in it people!
They are now a part of yourself, and you know it.
You know the GAFAMs.
Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft. Hmm?
The GAFAMs.
These companies are immoral.
They spend their time avoiding taxes.
Well, we will no longer authorize them to do so.
Many of these companies are antisocial,
because they use internet platforms to undo labor laws and to uberize society as a whole,
which is apparently an ideal for yuppies like our young banker, Mr Macron.
We will not let them destroy jobs and make workers do piecework again as in the Middle Ages.
The solidarity between workers and employees must be protected!
I heard that everybody wanted to repeal the El Khomri Labor law
—I said everyone, including the candidate of the Socialist Party (PS)—
I wonder why the Socialist government doesn't repeal it before leaving office.
Because some PS deputies presented an amendment to this law that says that internet platforms
do not have to reclassify those who work for them as permanent employees.
In many cases, the coalition of uberized workers...
—once the hallucinogenic period has passed in which some them say "Great! I don't have a boss anymore!"
But as a friend of mine said, yes you have a boss!
It's in your pocket. It's your phone!
And so you work and you work, for hours and hours,
because you're young and you think your energy is eternal,
but there's always a time when you worked so much that you end up falling from your bike,
or having a car accident, etc etc.
Uberization is a delusion!
Even if collaboration via internet platforms can be useful,
they cannot destroy jobs, occupations, and fair compensation.
Compensation is not a luxury, and employers' contributions are not a favor, but they are human needs.
We must all pay contributions so that when the time comes, everyone can receive what he needs.
It's a new continent!
You must concern yourselves with it and think about it, because it's not a minor issue,
and it's not a issue for bobos.
Poor bobos!
The digital world is invading every aspect of our lives,
and don't tell me you're not aware of it,
because employees are already asking for the right to disconnect, since it is now considered a favor.
The right to disconnect means the right to turn off your damn smartphone,
instead of having to use it all the time, night and day,
just for showing you're full of enthusiasm, competitive, flexible and busy with work.
The right to disconnect must be established because for now it's only a favor.
So... All right!
We don't have to be invaded, that's not true, but yes, it is an invasion.
An invasion of our tastes, of our customs, of our social relations, of our friends list.
Yes it is an invasion. We must set it in order and restore our freedom,
starting with the right to own personal databases and to have full control over them.
We refuse that big companies sell them without our consent.
Our youth must learn the vocabulary of digital technologies in school as we learned grammar before
because it is the language of the future.
They must learn the technologies that sustain the digital world,
but first and foremost, they must learn to look at things with a critical eye,
they should not let themselves be deceived, misled and fooled!
Our conception of digital technologies is different.
We call it the common digital world.
The protection of personal data, net neutrality—maybe you don't know it, but that's their plan for tomorrow,
they want to make the contents of those who pay more accesible, and those who don't will have to wait.
Net neutrality consists in forbidding such practices.
We must forbid it if we want to guarantee the equality of accessibility,  production and diffusion of users and producers.
These will be major issues of the 21st century.
They will be decisive for your jobs, your lives, and the way you look at your neighbors or your friends.
These issues are already out there in the big digital whirl.
Now is the time to set things straight, to legislate, to study what's going on and to set back our sovereignty again,
your personal sovereignty, i.e. your personal rights, but also the sovereignty of the state.
If we win this election, Microsoft will have to forget about its partnership with the Ministry of Education,
because we will not let them brainwash our kids!
They should know that we will not implement a single Microsoft software on any of France's independent instrument,
that is, our military or telecommunication equipment,
because our government was crazy enough to give Mr Trump access to our activities!
That's what it's all about!
Internet must be a public service, a public service of knowledge.
We cannot let big companies appropriate everything,
like the rights I talked about earlier, these works that entered the public domain.
This is the new version of liberty, equality and fraternity.
We must give back the digital continent to the people,
because the people created it, takes care of it and maintains it.
Enough with the globalitarian order that intends to enter our minds to tell us what we have to do!
Of course it has to do with free softwares and of course we will develop them!
Why are state administrations not in the vanguard of these issues?
You cannot live without having access to the internet, you all know this now.
You are increasingly told that this or that was dematerialized,
and lots of people don't know what to do, because they don't master these technologies,
and consequently, we must create public services to give them access to them, and they must be available everywhere.
To do that, we must substitute fiber-optic communication to satellites that turned the world into a giant microwave.
We are walking among waves, but we don't know the effects they will have on our health.
Satellites lead me to the space domain.
You don't even know why!
Did you know that France ranked second with respect to per capita contributions to the space industry?
You the French!
You the good-for-nothing who never have ideas and who are never flexible enough!
We are great power. An intellectual power, but also a material power.
Half of jobs in the space industry in Europe are located in France.
As a consequence, we have duties, responsibilities,
but also great hopes,
because we are capable of doing everything we need to do for the 21st century.
Provided that we have the authorization to do so!
Because it's the people that contributed to the development of rockets, when everybody said it was impossible to do.
Likewise, it's the people that contributed to develop submarine communication cables,
the cables that transimt the signals I mentionned earlier when I dealt with the digital world.
And guess who sold Alcatel-Lucent, the only company we had that could lay cables underwater?
It was Mr Macron, who's now telling us what we have to!
These people ruined everything! Who privatized our last public shares in Arianespace?
It was Mr Macron, who's now telling us what we have to do!
Yes you can boo him, because it's a lot of dirty tricks for a single man,
it's a lot of steps backward in the 21st century for people who claim to be modern,
who aren't even capable of explaining what modernity really is,
i.e. everything I just talked about, everything that is the future and the potential of our country,
that will give us the possibility to change the world for our kids,
and to make it more exciting than what we have known.
We're used to make a list of everything that is wrong,
but let's think about the splendor of the mind
that enables us to conquer, to explore and to learn.
We must take our responsibility.
France will not let space—that we are exploring and discovering—be privatized!
France—that was capable of developing Ariane rockets,
that represent 50 % of the world market—
France wil not accept the privatization of space,
because some would like to privatize it!
Two powers!
Two space powers decided that it was possible, contrary to the treaties on space that were in force until now,
that said space was the common property of all humanity, which is why space brings us together.
Two great powers decided that a country could appropriate the resources of planets and asteroids
if it was the first to get there.
What are these two great space powers?
The USA took a decision—and you know that when they do that, everyone is supposed to obey them.
And whether you like it or not, they consider that everything is their property when they arrive somewhere.
Ask yourself why they planted their damn flag on the Moon in 1969 and did not go back there since.
But there's another great space power that decided to emancipate all the companies
that would find something to exploit in space.
This great space power is the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg!
It decided to exempt companies that would do that from paying taxes and to be tax-friendly with them.
You had the good taste of smiling, but honestly,
we're beginning to have it up to here—big time!—
that the President of the European Commission is the man who has organized tax evasion all over Europe for years
and who has profited from other countries,
and now I discovered that...
Yes you can boo him!
...I discovered that he also wants to do that.
I said it, we have a responsibility.
If we want to keep occupying low Earth orbit,
France must initiate and be in the lead of a remediation campaign of low Earth orbit.
Did you watch Gravity?
Come on, answer me!
Audience: Yes!
JLM: OK, good! But that's not true!
You can see space pollution in Gravity.
There's a crewed satellite—we Europeans should do crewed space programmes, why don't we do them?—
and it is destroyed because of some bolts and spacecraft parts that float in space.
I told you...
I told you that we must tackle the issue of space.
And if we...
We must tackle this subject because it will set other industries in motion.
When an industry accumulates intelligence and skills, and requires us to do more than we can do at present...
We are one of the leading countries—I won't say the leading country—the second maybe,
with respect to the number of engineers per 100,000 inhabitants.
I want us to be self-confident,
I want us to know that we can do it!
We can do something for this new century,
and not by dragging our feet,
or by letting ourselves be told what we have to do by dog trainers like our current leaders,
but we'll do it gladly and enthusiastically!
Gladly and enthusiastically!
Yep!
Listen, we are a great power.
How many times...
How many times did I talk to you about oceans?
We are the second maritime power in the world.
Isn't it extraordinary?
Oceans are huge! They cover 70 % of the planet's surface.
We have all the means to explore it—the technical means, the scientific means and enough skilled professionals.
We want to invest a part of the 100 billion euros we want to inject in production in the maritime economy,
because we will invest 100 billion euros,
whereas other candidates want to take them back!
Don't they realize? France is already agonizing, but they want to take 100 billion euros more from the economy!
We will invest 100 billion euros into the economy to make up for budget cuts,
and a part of this investment will be injected into the maritime economy, to produce seaweeds... We can do everything!
Starting with this! You don't know it, but it's made of seaweeds.
And many other things!
We'll draw energy from oceans! You want to phase out nuclear power, but we cannot stop using electricity to do that!
As a consequence, we'll have to use different energy resources. We must use 100 % renewable energies,
and oceans are a huge reservoir of energies!
They contain 75 times the required amount of energy we need on Earth.
As a consequence, our only limit is our capacity to invest.
Our only limit is our capacity to invent, to set machines, wind and marine turbines.
How come not a single offshore wind turbine was set during the last presidential term?
How come Mr Macron and co. sold absolutely all the companies that produced wind turbines?
The only companies we have left are DCNS and a few others that we'll set back to work with our investment plan.
How come our neighbors have the capacity to do it and not us?
And yet we'll have to have the equivalent of 15 nuclear reactors by 2030.
The equivalent of 15 nuclear reactors with maritime energies would create thousands and thousands of jobs.
The maritime economy employs 300,000 people today.
I had a discussion with the maritime cluster. They all disagree with me, except on one point.
If we get to work, we could create from 300 to 400,000 jobs, because we'll have decided to make investments.
This shows that to run the economy of tomorrow, we don't need to keep on assassinating the planet.
On the contrary, it would regenerate.
France must set an exemple.
It must be in the lead of other nations, take initiatives and have imagination.
It just produced—we'll show you on March 30th—
a document that is the equivalent of Diderot's encyclopedia in the18th century,
that was a real revolution of the mind.
France will publish a document called "Les Océanides" (The Oceanids).
278 researchers from all over the world from all sciences and techniques,
from human to "hard" sciences, archaeologists, paleontologists, anthropologists.
They studied—listen to this!—the history of the last 5,000 years on the five continents
to assess the importance of oceans and navigation in the develoment of the human civilization.
Glory to the human mind and to our researchers!
Glory to those who did this work,
who enable us to make plans for the future and whose inventions improve our lives.
Everywhere, France must be in the lead of the missions that aim at improving the situation.
It is our duty to propose a campaign to remediate oceans and remove this abominable mass of plastic
that proliferates there and that poisons all the living creatures.
How long are we going to let that happen?
France must present a cooperation project to all its Mediterranean neighbors and partners
—all of them, especially those from the little Mediterranean basin that directly concerns us—
a project for collecting all the wastewater from the shores in order to prevent the Mediterranean
—the mother of all the seas,  the mother of everything, the mother of our civilization—
from turning into a sewer in less than 50 years!
We must do something!
Enough with wastewater spills!
About this issue, I cannot finish without repeating something I already said.
You have a battle to wage—you and I of course!—a battle against privatization.
You are not aware of it, but there's an authority that delivers permissions for offshore drilling.
It is a very repectable international authority.
It already granted 25 authorizations to do offshore drillings.
The last country that was authorized to drill was India.
Sulphur emissions are collected.
They contain more minerals than anything.
They all started to exploit oceans using the savage methods of capitalism.
Exploiting! Exploiting! Conquering! Appropriating! Making money!
With everything we find, everything that moves!
A international court must be created to register complaints.
Otherwise, they'll do as they wish,
and we will depend on an authority that will be invaded by lobbies, as all authorities.
This court has to be created, and France must be—I said it on many occasions during meetings on this issue—
in the lead of a mandate under the authority of the UNO.
The UNO, yes, which is the only institution that represents all humanity.
It is often mocked and said to be slow, but for now, it is the only institution that all the nations have in common,
and it is far more legitimate than all the rogue institutions like the G8 or the G20
that bring the rest of the world to heel.
There must be an international treaty on deep waters.
Until now, there has been exclusive economic areas—which means they belong to countries,
this one, that one, sometimes we don't know, and this could bring about wars.
You're afraid of ice melts at the poles, but they're already in their boats trying to be the first to appropriate oceans bottoms.
Such is the situation today. It explains the tensions between Russia, Norway, the USA and many other countries.
Who owns the bottom of the oceans and the resources they contain?
Meanwhile, all we do is talk about other issues!
We don't know that the map of oceans bottom is changing, and that we are a great power,
not for ourselves—we must be a leading power and speak on behalf of all humanity! This is our strength!
So what are going to do? There must be an international treaty on deep waters!
It is called a 'res nullius' territory, it belongs to no one,
which means that the first country who appropriates it owns it.
Those who want to dump the waste of their big ocean liner and spill their wastewater
can do it, because for now, it belongs to no one,
but tomorrow, it will belong to the first country who appropriates it.
We must tackle these issues and  questions, because we are skilled and powerful in all these domains.
There are ten levels of intervention to get to the bottom of oceans!
Ten levels of human intervention,
ten levels of excellence!
Well there are French leading companies for each of these ten levels,
from the bottom—not always for the best, i.e. drilling—to the surface!
We can do this everywhere, consequently, we have a duty: doing it and sharing our techniques!
We mustn't keep our knowledge for ourselves!
We must have...
As I said earlier, we must involve other countries that for now do not have the workers or the capacity
to take part in this new great feast of humanity.
We must create an international oceans university open to all the countries that want to join us
—French-speaking countries in particular—to develop these activities,
because all the peoples of the world need to have access to oceans,
because all the peoples of the world need to be aware of this issue in order to feel implicated.
When we had the idea to do this rally,
we thought "Well..."
"Space, the digital world, oceans, culture, research...
People might not be interested in these issues..."
I don't believe a word of it.
I think you are interested by these issues.
Audience: Yes!
That's not all!
It's like appetizers, although I'm dwelling on the subject a bit.
But it's a good thing sometimes.
It's supposed to make you want to read the booklets on the digital world, on culture, on schools.
Please read them.
And even if you don't want to vote for this programme, read them anyway,
because the force of ideas is that they are contagious, as they say.
I'm a happy man these days, you know?
Because the space of the ideas we've been fighting for during the last years,
even though there were moments when we felt lonely, as if no one understood what we were saying,
well we were heartened to hear other people talking about ecological planning!
We were heartened to hear the words we use being shared on all sides!
We thank those who led that struggle before us,
and we thank ourselves for leading this fight.
It's a good thing that other people take on our ideas!
I'm not in favor of copyrights!
You know, the whole point of internet is the hypertext link, it changed everything,
however the EU said: "Wait! There are copyrights!"
Well I don't think there should be copyrights! I think there should be a right of quotation on the internet.
I mean people should say: "I stole Mélenchon's ideas" sometimes.
They don't, but it doesn't matter.
What matters is the spreading of ideas.
When you share ideas like these, you understand that we cannot live in an absurd, cruel and stupid world,
in which eight people own as much as 50 % of the world population!
This is absurd, ridiculous, obscene and immoral!
Growing rich is immoral!
This is the morality I'm advocating.
Of course, we should enjoy life and be rewarded for our efforts,
but what is the point of accumulating all these fortunes?
Why should a handful of people own billions?
What for? Does it make them any happier?
No it doesn't, it just goes into the financial bubble!
Yesterday, I was in a small village called Champagney, Haute-Saône.
I felt like going there all of a sudden.
I felt like going there because February 4th is the anniversary of the abolition of slavery.
There are still 250 million slaves around the world, you know?
They're not far sometimes, but we don't see them.
I was saying that...
—Of course, slavery should not be compared with other forms of servitude.
This form of criminality is very specific.
To begin with, it lasted 300 years!
And when the people of Champagney heard that blacks were enslaved...
—they didn't believe that they were black to begin with!
They had to look at a portrait of Balthazar, the Magus, to make sure blacks existed.
And so they wondered how come human beings could be sold as objects,
all the more so because one of them honored their Lord when he was born! It didn't make any sense!
So these good people wrote a letter to the King.
Can you imagine that the people of Champagney—minors, loggers, peasants—
worried about people who were suffering on the other side of the world?
This is what they told the King in their list of grievances: "Enough!"
It is our duty to disobey the economic realities that are said to prevail over the realities of human beings and of the heart.
Got it?
And I'd like to add that...
As Victor Schoelcher said at the time of the second abolition of slavery...
He said: "If the only way to make the colonies work is slavery, then we must give up our colonies!"
And Robespierre before him said: "Death to the colonies if a principle is at stake!"
You must carry this flame of rebellioussness within yourselves!
It links you to all the human beings, towards whom each and everyone of you have a responsibility !
Yes!
But there's something you need to do before that.
You mustn't renounce your main prerogative.
Your right to power.
You are citizens, and the Declaration of 1789 is called the Declaration of the Rights of Man,
but it would be nothing without the last phrase: The Declaration of the Right of Man and of the Citizens.
Of the Citizens!
You had power, and you must have it back!
You must do more than kicking them out or voting for the lesser evil, because the lesser evil is still evil!
For once, you must answer our call and consider your ballot paper an adhesion paper!
Try not to lose it!
Don't let yourselves be deceived by a pretendedly antifinance speech again,
followed by a pretendedly "I will change the European treaties" speech!
Look closely, study and convince people around you.
Don't let yourselves be fooled by fine words,
but look what is going to make a great force of us.
This is why we must vote to abolish the presidential monarchy.
This is why the core and number one priority of the programme is the establishment of the 6th Republic.
The 6th Republic!
Not the 5th Republic, in which the President who,
following a discussion with the powdered marquesses around him on the occasion,
says he will organize a referendum to ask you whether you want him to ratify the treaty or not.
We want a real assembly that regenerates the French people!
The deputies we'll choose —men and women—will share a common characteristic,
that of having never been elected in any assembly!
These deputies—men and women—whether they are elected or chosen by drawing lots,
by redefining the rights of the French people together,
will regenerate the legal community and our consent to this community,
Today, we do not consent to the law, because it often seems to be abusive, and often, it is the case.
How come was the El Khomri labor law voted when neither the French nor demonstrators on the street
nor deputies nor anyone wanted it? It was forced into the legislature using Article 49-3 six times!
Down with the presidential monarchy!
Don't let the the numerous fabulists who are out there these days deceive you!
The constitution of the 6th Republic must be written by a constituent assembly
and ratified by the French people by referendum!
It must not be a draft written by a handful of people that would be conceded to the people!
You will introduce the new sacred rights of individual freedom in the constitution,
but more importantly, you must make sure to keep your power permanently,
because I will propose the introduction of the recall referendum into the new constitution.
It enables the people to remove an elected representative from office when it gathered enough signatures.
I was told that it would be a mess, but what is the current situation if not a mess?
Is it because it is invisible that they don't call it a mess? Of course it's a mess, the most despicable one!
We have to obey laws that are unfair and despicable because no one ever voted them,
because they are decrees of the President-King, who is surrounded day and night by the court of the stock exchange,
its lobbyists, its subdivisions, its puppets and its storytellers!
I want my message to be clear as crystal.
Everytime someone gives us a hand instead of insulting us, we are happy.
Everytime someone offered to give us a hand and to accompany us for a while, we never said no.
But we will always refuse schemes and secret arrangements!
We will never exchange parts of our programme against constituencies,
or ministerial portfolios against amnesty our amnesia!
This is and will be out of the question!
My candidacy is about being intransigent!
We are not harsh, we do not turn down offers of help,
we are just demanding!
There's nothing else I can do because that's the way you are, and I'm your representative.
I represent hard heads and rebels, people who will not be taken for a fool for a second, a third our a fourth time!
Audience: Resistance! Resistance! Resistance!
JLM: Come on, my friends!
I want to hear the people in Paris too!
We are in Lyon!
Lyon used to be a major working-class city!
While your are shouting "resistance",
let's see if you are as resistant as I am!
Of course, since we are in Lyon, we know how to end this rally.
We could sing.
("Le Chant des canuts" / The silkworkers' song)
♪ In order to govern, one must have mantles and ribbons on one's back ♪
♪ We weave some for you, Lords of the Earth ♪
♪ But we poor silkworkers are burried without a shroud ♪
Audience: ♪ We are the silkworkers and we walk naked ♪
♪ But our reign will begin when yours will end ♪
♪ We will weave the old world's shroud ♪
♪ Because we already hear the brewing rebellion ♪
♪ We are the silkworkers and we will no longer walk naked ♪
Goodbye Paris!
La Marseillaise: ♪ Arise, children of the Fatherland,
The day of glory has arrived! ♪
♪ Against us tyranny's
Bloody banner is raised,  ♪
♪ (Tyranny's)
Bloody banner is raised ♪
♪ Do you hear, in the countryside,
The roar of those ferocious soldiers? ♪
♪ They're coming right into your arms
To cut the throat of your sons, your women! ♪
♪ To arms, citizens,
Form your battalions, ♪
♪ Let's march, let's march! ♪
♪ Let an impure blood
Soak our fields! ♪